===============================
DIcEd--Desktop Icon Editor v1.2    DAL Systems 

by David A. Lyons     25-Feb-89    (updated 4-Mar-2021 DAL)
===============================

DIcEd lets you create and modify icons stored in icon files.  Icon
files are used by the Finder and are stored in a disk's ICONS
folder.

DIcEd was Shareware, but now it's free.

DIcEd requires System Disk 3.2 or later.

Here's a list of all the menu items in DIcEd and how to use them.

----------
Apple menu
----------
About DIcEd--displays information about Desktop Icon Editor,
  including the amount of RAM currently unused in your machine.

Special Keys--shows a summary of special keys available in Edit
  Icon windows.

Help--displays this file ("Diced.help") in a window.  You can then
  print the help with Print Text in the File menu.

Desk Accessories--if you have any NDAs (New Desk Accessories) in
  the SYSTEM/DESK.ACCS folder of your boot disk, they will be
  available in the Apple menu.

---------
File menu
---------
New--opens a window for a brand-new (empty) Icon file.

Open...--open a window for an existing icon file of your choice.
  It uses a Standard File dialog, so you can use Tab or the Disk
  button to change disks, Apple-period for the Cancel button, and
  ESC for the Close button (or click on the patname above the
  list).  Click twice on the file you want to open, or click once
  and use the Open button.  The up and down arrows also work.

  There are three buttons in an Icon File window:  Prev (moves
  back one icon), Next (moves forward one icon), and Edit (opens a
  window for editing the current icon).  Any number of Icon File
  windows and Edit Icon windows can be open at once.
  
  An Edit Icon window contains a Save button that copies its icon
  back into its parent window.
  
  In an Icon File window, the left arrow is like the Prev button,
  the right arrow is like the Next button, and Return or Enter is
  like the Edit button.  Also, Apple-left-arrow moves to the first
  icon in the file, and Apple-right-arrow moves to the last icon
  in the file.

Close--closes whatever window is in front.  If the window belongs
  to DIcEd (meaning it's not a Desk Accessory window) and contains
  work that hasn't been saved, you'll be asked whether it's okay
  to throw away the changes.  If the window is an Icon File
  window, any "child" windows containing icons being edited are
  closed first.

Close All--closes all the open windows.  Just like choosing Close
  repeatedly until there aren't any windows open.

Save...--saves an icon file to disk using the same name.  This
  item is available only when an Icon File window (rather than
  an Edit Icon window or some other window) is in front.  If the
  window's name is "Untitled" then Save asks for a name just like
  Save As... does.

Save As...--saves an icon file to disk using a new name.

Save As Source...--creates a text file containing a fragment of
  source code for APW C, APW/ORCA Assembler, or Merlin.  A block
  of bytes is generated for each icon in the front Icon File
  window.  (The resulting memory image is appropriate for use with
  DrawIcon but *not* as an iconItem in a dialog.)

Print Text (slot 1)--Prints the contents of the front window to a
  printer in slot 1.  Available when the front window is the Help
  window or a View Text File window, and also when the Clipboard
  window is in front and the clipboard contains text.  [Sorry--no
  printing to LaserWriters at present.]

Transfer to...--runs another program of your choice.  This may
  save some time over Quitting to your program selector and
  running another program from there.  If any windows are open,
  they get closed first, and you get a chance to abort the
  transfer and save your work.  (The filetype of the next program
  must be SYS or S16.)

Quit--quits DIcEd and puts you back where you came from (from the
  Finder, for example).  Asks for confirmation and then closes all
  windows, giving you a chance to abort and save your work.

---------
Edit menu
---------
Undo--Restores the front Icon File or Edit Icon window to the way
  it was before the last interesting operation.  Undo a second
  time always undoes the first Undo, so you can toggle back and
  forth between two states.  Undo is also useful with some desk
  accessories.

Copy--If the front window is an Icon File or Edit Icon window,
  the current icon is copied to the clipboard (in both PICT form
  and in a special form containing information about the icon).
  If the front window is a text file window (including the Help
  window) then all the text is copied to the clipboard.  Copy is
  also useful with some desk accessories.

Cut--If the front window is an Icon File window, the current icon
  is copied to the clipboard and then removed from the window.
  Cut is also useful with some desk accessories.

Paste--If the front window is an Icon File window, an icon on the
  clipboard is inserted into the file immediately AFTER the
  current icon.  (To add an icon at the very beginning of the
  file, first use Prev to move all the way back to icon #0.)
  After the icon is inserted, you get moved forward by one icon
  automatically so that the new icon is the current one.  Paste
  is also useful with some desk accessories.  

Clear--If the front window is an Icon File window, the current
  icon is removed from the file.  Just like Cut, except that the
  icon is not copied to the clipboard first.  Clear is also useful
  with some Desk Accessories.

Show Clipboard--opens a window that displays the contents of the
  Clipboard.  (If the window is already open, choosing this item
  just brings it to the front.)

---------
Icon menu
---------
New Icon--adds a new icon to the icon file right after the current
  icon and then moves forward one icon so that the new icon is
  the current one.  The new icon is initially a black and white
  piece of paper with the top right corner folded over.

Edit Attributes--Presents a dialog allowing you to modify the
  attributes of an icon:  The filetype, auxiliary type, name, and
  application name associated with an icon.  Note the special
  filetypes at the end of the list corresponding to things like
  disks, drives, and trash cans.  There is also a "Color" check
  box--if you check this box, the icon will always be drawn just
  as you design it, never with extra coloring added.  (The small
  and large versions of an icon have separate Color attributes,
  so it matters whether you are viewing a Large or Small icon when
  you choose Edit Attributes.)

  Note that the "Application name" for an icon is for associating
  a separate application with a group of document icons.  For
  example, the application for BAS (Applesoft BASIC) program
  documents is "*/BASIC.LAUNCHER".  (The "*" refers to the name
  of the boot disk; you should use a "*" rather than putting in
  the actual name of your boot disk.)
  
  Icons that show up for applications, rather than for documents,
  should have blank application name fields.  For example, if
  you want to make an icon for the Installer program found on
  the System Tools 4.0 disk that comes with GS/OS, you should
  set Filetype to S16, auxtype to 0, filename to INSTALLER, and
  Application name should be blank.

  Tip:  uppercase and lowercase letters are _different_ in the
  filename field.  For example, if you want to make an icon
  for your favorite game called SKI.JUMP, you should type it
  like that in all capitals.  (This applies to ProDOS files;
  GS/OS can in theory work with other file systems which don't
  restrict filenames to all caps.)

  A "*" in the filename field matches zero or more characters.
  Use just a "*" to match any name; or use something like *.ROOT
  to match all filenames ending in ".ROOT".

Copy Image to Mask--calculates a new mask for an icon based on its
  image.  A black pixel appears in the mask for each corresponding
  non-white pixel in the image.  All other pixels in the mask will
  be white.

Copy Mask to Image--calculates a new image for an icon based on
  its mask.  Each pixel in the image becomes the same color as the
  corresponding pixel in the mask.

Fill Image--sets every pixel in an icon's image to the color
  selected in the color palette.

Fill Mask--sets every pixel in an icon's mask to black if black
  is selected in the color palette; otherwise sets every pixel to
  white.

---------
View menu
---------
by Large Icon--
by Small Icon--
  Selects the large or small editions of icons.  Takes effect
  immediately in all open Edit Icon windows.

Plump Pixels--
Fat Pixels--
Fatter Pixels--
Mongo Pixels--
  Selects one of four different sizes for the fat pixels in
  every Edit Icon window.  The usual size is Fat Pixels, and
  the current setting is always shown by a check mark.

------------
Special menu
------------
View text file--opens a window for viewing a file of type TXT
  (plain text) or SRC (Apple Programmer's Workshop source code).
  The Help item in the Apple menu is really just View Text File
  on "Diced.Help".  You can use Copy in the Edit menu to put the
  text in a viewed file onto the clipboard, and you can Print a
  viewed file to a printer in slot 1 using Print Text in the File
  menu.

Delete file--permanently removes a file of your choice from disk.

Rename file--changes the name of a file of your choice.

Next Window--sends the frontmost window to the back.  When a
  desk accessory is in front, DIcEd's key equivalents don't work,
  but you can still choose commands including Next Window from
  their menus.

Print Shareware Envelope--Prints, on your printer in slot 1, a
  one-page pre-addressed form suitable for folding and mailing
  with your comments and registration fee.

-----------------
Edit Icon windows
-----------------
Each Edit Icon window displays an image and mask for one icon.
You make changes here and then click the Save button in the
Icon File window to copy the changed back into the window the
icon came from.

Click on a small color square to choose a color.  Use the pencil
to draw in that color.  If you make a mistake, just click on the
pixel again and it will change back.  Holding the button down and
moving around always continues the action that was started--either
drawing in the current color or restoring pixels to their previous
colors.

Shortcut:  select a color by holding down Apple and clicking on a
pixel of the color you want to draw in.

To shift the position of an icon or its mask, hold down the Shift
key (the pencil cursor changes into a hand) and hold down the
mouse button while dragging the outline to a new location.  If
you don't like the result, choose Undo from the Edit menu.

To change the size of an icon, drag the bottom right corner of
its image by the small square.  Note that the width will always
be an even number of pixels.  The minimum size for an icon in
DIcEd is 8x8, and the maximum is 64x64.

To replace all pixels of one color with another color, choose the
new color in the color palette; then hold down Option (the pencil
cursor will change to a bow-tie) and click on any pixel of the
color you want to replace.

-----------------
Technical details
-----------------
There is currently no officially-defined Scrap Manager type for
Icon data.  DIcEd uses scrap type $4945 (ASCII "IE") for putting
icons onto the clipboard.  This is the same type used by Paul
Elseth's IconEd, so a convention has been established.

--------
Apple IIgs is a registered trademark of Apple Computer, Inc.

--------------------------
End of DIcEd documentation
--------------------------
